thank you
hey welcome to the keto Edge Summit I'm
your host Dr David jockers and I'm here
actually with a great mentor of mine Dr
Thomas safe Reed and here on the keto
Edge Summit our goal is really to help
dispel the myths and Empower you to
improve your health and your life using
a keto Edge or ketogenic lifestyle and
so Dr Thomas Seyfried actually wrote the
book The metabolic theory of cancer and
you're a professor and a researcher at
Boston College is that correct that's
correct yep and tell us about how you
got into cancer and cancer research to
begin with we've always done work in the
in lipid metabolism and cancer and
basically it's purely academic yeah but
we also did a lot of work on ketogenic
diets for epilepsy and one thing led to
the other yeah and then we realized that
you can shrink tumors by depriving them
of their fermentable fuels yeah which
then put us on the pathway to um manage
and try to resolve these cancers yeah so
it came through basic academics
through epilepsy because the ketogenic
diets have been used in epileptic for
epilepsy years that's where all the
beginning research is beginning Wilder
at Mayo Clinic yes back in the 1920s but
we had been we we have models for
epilepsy and we were finding that these
ketogenic diets are spectacular in
reducing seizures yeah and they reduce
seizures by lowering blood sugar right
elevating ketones right and then it
became clear that the cancer cells uh
need that glucose and the same strategy
could be it's even better for cancer
than it is for epilepsy yeah absolutely
um and then and the mechanism is so much
clearer more clear for how those
reducing glucose and elevating ketones
actually manages cancer we don't know
how that manages epilepsy right now 100
years right but for cancer it's clear
and we know how to exploit that yeah
yeah and Otto Warburg right originally
kind of pioneered the idea right he
showed that cancers are fermenting yes
okay what he didn't know is they also
ferment amino acids which right I don't
know yeah but basically uh Otto Warburg
was correct regardless of what uh people
want to say that he didn't know he was
correct yeah absolutely because he has a
lot of critics right well they said that
he was wrong yeah but he was no he was
not wrong yeah because if Warburg is
correct then most of what we're doing
for cancer is incorrect yes so therefore
you have to say that Warburg is wrong to
preserve your own field right absolutely
so but Warburg was correct but he didn't
have all the parts to the public yeah
yeah putting those hearts together
that's right extending his work to where
it really exactly uh leads to the
resolution of the disease that's right
and so for the listeners out there when
he was talking about cancers they
ferment basically they break down sugar
and we also know now amino acids like
glutamine right they break this down
that's their fuel source okay and they
run that through glycolysis and
glutamanolysis and yep exactly you have
these two fuels coming into the cell and
all or nearly all cancers are the same
disease yeah so when people have to
realize that they all think cancer is a
hundred diseases it's right it's not
complicated it's a single disease right
it's a metabolic it all works oh the
same therapy will manage most cancers
yeah and that's a hard pill to swallow
yeah for so many people institutions
private foundations they say my my
cancer is different from your cancer no
that's all the same yeah and so tell us
about some of the different components
between like a normal cell and a normal
cells metabolism and then a cancer cell
and its metabolism and all of our cells
in the body uh respire that we use yes
and we practice water and CO2 the cancer
cell is different because they have a
defect in that capability which is the
mitochondrion basically yeah and uh so
if the cell is going to survive if it's
not going to respire effectively how
does the cell live yeah the the single
largest consumer of energy in any one
cell is a pump on the outer surface of
the membrane and those pumps maintain
the gradient which is life yeah and when
the pumps run out of energy the cell
dies yeah so you have to have energy for
the pump so if you're not respiring to
get energy where did the cell get the
energy to survive it ferments falls back
on an ancient pathway yeah and uses
these fuels in the environment glucose
and glutamine to generate the energy for
the pumps the problem is these cells now
become disregulated in their growth when
you fall back on this ancient pathway
the cells also fall back on what they
did which is proliferate right so
essentially you have a fallback on an
ancient pathway that's been that's been
in Evolution for for eons yeah so these
cells are basically fermenters and as
long as the fermentable fuel is
available they will live yeah it's very
hard to kill them without and that's why
they keep coming back they're resistant
they're resistant you're not taking away
the fermentable fuels yeah so the more
toxic drugs you give to the patient more
radiation give
frees up more fermentable fuels right so
you actually contribute to the success
of the Disease by using some of the
techniques that we're using in the
clinics today consequently we have 1600
people a day dying from cancer yeah
crazy absolutely it's not a you know it
doesn't have to happen yeah and most
oncologists have no idea about this if
you were to go to them and say hey does
sugar cause cancer fault yeah they're
not trained to do that very true okay
their educational process is missing the
most important components right and if
they're not ever trained to do this and
they're trying to do only certain things
they must know they must think that
that's that was is what works yeah but
um so this is the great we have a vast
absence of knowledge right okay and and
they're not trained so what do you do
you go and go to those guys and they're
going to give you radiation and chemo
and radical surgery because that's all
they know what to do yeah they're they
they're not bad their people if they're
interested in the survival of their
patients absolutely using the the tools
that they were instructed to use but
they were never instructed to use
metabolic there yes so so you have this
Missing Link yeah and metabolic therapy
if if a knowledgeable oncologist
understands metabolic therapy they can
use something like a chemotherapy more
effectively right well they could yeah
the problem is was when you go down that
path you are now at odds with the uh
mainstreams of the AMA true in treating
patients and they fear that they can
lose their license and they could be
coarse ostracized from the group yeah
um even if they want to do this they're
restricted from doing it because it's
not sanctioned yeah so then you have to
go to a higher level why are they not
sanctioning this right you know then we
get into big other issues yes absolutely
and so with your research what sort of
models are you looking at and uh and and
what have you found as you go deeper
with your research well we we've
developed some of the best models for
static cancer and glucose lifestyle
it's really growing very very popular
it's a it's a very devastating yeah it
is I've had many many patients yeah and
um unfortunately uh it's the standard of
care that basically is responsible in
large part for the demise in most of
these patients it's a tragedy yeah so
and the ones who go metabolic uh do much
much much better yeah so um but it's
very hard uh to break into that uh
mindset right um and you're right the
surgeons are unfamiliar with this the
oncology neuro oncology yes but it's not
only it's like breast cancer colon
cancer every kind of cancer yeah I don't
know yeah you know um they hear about it
but they don't they can't implement it
because they're not sanctioned to
implement yeah so we have a problem a
huge problem definitely all these
cancers definitely and so when you're
putting somebody into a therapeutic
ketosis for cancer right in your
research what have you found as far as
blood sugar kind of where we want to
keep that blood sugar where we want to
get those ketones up to well this is we
published the paper on the glucose
Ketone index calculator which allows
everyone to know where they stand with
respect to therapeutic crisis so people
ask me can I eat this can I do that and
the answer is well measure your key your
in how your body responds yeah how your
body responds what's your index right so
if you're if you're 1.0 or below you're
doing well you're in therapeutic ketosis
yeah so if you eat this and you fall out
of therapeutic ketosis don't eat that
right right and it could vary from one
person to the next yeah like what you
can eat this other guy can't vice versa
yeah so you just measure it so then you
have a hard biochemical marker I'll let
you let you know whether or not you can
be eating that or doing this right okay
and there's a new app that just came out
um called heads up Health yeah where
they adapted the glucose Ketone index
together with um what a daily a person
would do on his daily life yeah exercise
what he eats what he does all during the
day measuring is index it was made for
cancer patients yeah originally but now
we find all these normal healthy people
right because I can track their data not
get cancer yeah are using the same app
so it's kind of interesting and it looks
like that glucose ketones index but also
what you're eating uh what kind of
exercise you have yeah you know what
your days of parts of the day where you
don't do anything or so it regulates
your whole activities in your body
related to therapeutic ketosis yeah so
then you have a clear idea of what your
body is experiencing over the course of
days and weeks and months so it gives
you a kind of a report card right on
your body's uh health status yeah which
is really quite yeah it's a very
empowering yeah so so helpful absolutely
yep and so obviously there's lots of
research coming out on ketones and their
ability to help improve brain function
all different components like that and
so as far as that goes
um what are we finding out just about
beta hydroxybutyrate may be
epigenetically are you finding anything
well of course when you're doing to the
academic go down to the academic level
you know beta hydroxybutarases and a
histone diacetylase yeah yeah and they
have drug toxic drugs that do that right
so the question is how high do you have
to get your ketones to have uh inhibit
hysteria laces and the answer is we're
not really sure right okay
this is um a wonderful uh path to follow
in academic medicine yeah you know but
um the patient with cancer or
Alzheimer's disease or something they're
not really interested in in histone the
acetylene right they're just interested
in trying to keep the tumor at Bay or
keep whatever cognitive function they
have remaining right right so this is
exactly issue and they want to know what
I have to do to stay in this zone so I
don't go down faster than I'm than I'm
on this path yeah so they want to stay
healthy they want to so but the academic
isn't more interested in the molecular
mechanisms right by which beta
hydroxybutyrate may not only Target and
restrict cancer growth but also
maintaining cognitive Acuity in your
brain and skin cells and things like
that and I know in your book metabolic
theory of cancer which really made a
huge impression answer as a metabolic
disease cancer yeah yeah cancer as a
metabolic disease but it is where you
outline the metabolic theory of cancer
absolutely that book really had a big
impression on me when I when I first
read it and as a functional medicine
practitioner well I had a big effect on
me writing it I I imagine in fact
sometimes I don't even know who wrote
that that's funny and so and this book
is like the textbook for for how a
ketogenic diet or ketosis really impacts
these Cancers and ultimately how cancers
run off fermentation like he's talking
about great book to get especially if
you're out there and you're a healthcare
practitioner I would definitely
recommend getting a book like this and
really diving into it because you'll see
all the research outlined uh in that and
it just goes in depth and you know it
also helps support your research right
and and whatnot so
um so anyways getting that would
definitely be great dates and in that
you kind of outline like how to put
somebody in ketosis okay using basically
a nutrition strategy and in a sense it
was kind of a calorie uh deficit for a
period of time well we're at first that
was the yeah Draconian right approach to
this yeah you know just bite the bullet
stop eating right it was a little more
challenging yeah very hard anybody who's
tried to go on water only yeah fasting
yeah because your brain is addicted to
glucose oh yeah exactly you have the
same with Earl Caesar that's the
symptoms as if you were addicted to
alcohol cocaine or whatever yep you know
you go through malaise you get you get
tired fatigued yep sometimes lightheaded
you know and this is not fun yeah
however we're learning from all these
patients and people that are doing this
feeding back information how to make
that transition a little bit less
difficult so I was speaking to someone
the other day and they said well what I
do is I stop eating for just 24 hours
which is most people can do yeah and
then take some Ketone supplements right
and brings us uh up and then I take
those he says I took those for a couple
of days and then stop eating he says the
transition when you're already in
ketosis to a therapeutic fast so much
easier is much easier oh yeah you don't
feel so uh you know debilitated yeah
because those exogenous ketones give you
that naturalness work for him other
people say no I'm biting the bullet
right away I'm just going to stop eating
yeah you know and then the older you get
uh the more the longer and more
difficult yeah without practice right it
is to get into these zones believe me
kids young people in their 20s and early
30s and not as metabolically damaged no
they they're able to get into this yes
it's not it's not it's doable but
uncomfortable right but if you're you
know in your 60s and 70s you try to do
this man this is like trying to break an
alcohol or drug addiction it's not easy
yeah you know your body has been so
accustomed for glucose for so long it's
much harder but you can do it but it
just requires a lot a lot more uh power
on the part of the person yeah
absolutely discipline absolutely and so
you know typical the way I've learned it
typical nutritional ketosis is really
between one and three millimolars some
are really one and maybe up to seven or
so
um and so for therapeutic that's all in
the therapeutic range that's in the
therapeutic range okay give your blood
sugar measurements and your family yeah
glucose to be in the around 70 or 80
rights per deciliters you convert that
to millimolar and you do the ratio right
and you're pretty close to one or below
one yeah so you're the therapeutic
you're in the zone and not therapy once
you know what the zone is yeah then you
can work to get to that zone right right
so but people doing it on their own
without knowing the index oh I'm in
ketosis well how do you know I peed on
the strip and it told me it was right
that's not accurate you got to have the
blood ratio yeah that's the accurate way
then you know for sure you're in third
and he said that blood ratio is one to
one one to one in millimoles yes and
millimoles because a lot of the glucose
meter give you glucose and milligram
particularly yeah
a lot of people they just want to push a
button and get the number they don't
want to do this arithmetic yeah you know
it's very simple but the calculator
allows does that all that for you yeah
exactly so you know you just have to get
your your numbers you put into the
calculator and there's there's your
yours absolutely absolutely and there's
a big difference between a 70 milligram
per deciliter blood sugar for somebody
that's keto adapted and somebody who's
not right so you hit 70 and you're not
keto adapted you're going to have
hypoglycemic responses well actually if
you're in ketosis you're not going to
have any not if you're in ketosis but if
you want to drop your blood sugar it's
like you take insulin right you'd go
unconscious yeah exactly it's a
life-threatening condition absolutely
right but if you're in therapeutic
ketosis yeah you can push your blood
sugars way down yeah you know Dom the
Agostino my friend got it down to 25
milligrams right that's a liter yeah you
know a four day fast with Ketone
supplement and he was able to push his
blood sugar to 25 million so he did that
with just a fast
yeah and he took a photograph of the
meter to let me know it's legit yeah I
mean yeah so uh so I know you can do it
right uh and I said how did you feel Dom
and Dom said I feel spiritual so yeah
because I mean just those ketones I'm
sure yeah so so oh yeah oh yeah but you
know how you can't do that for very long
but there are some people who can always
remain around one or a little above uh
yeah when you go to those extremes
you're down well below one yeah 0.3
right 0.4 range and that's not really
sustainable long term it's hard to do
that yeah it's hard to sustain it and I
don't think most people want to sustain
it yeah I mean you're right you have to
be very disciplined absolute client
absolutely do that you won't more or
less have to drop out of society yeah to
stay in those zones but if you have a
disease like cancer yeah the longer you
can remain in that zone and don't forget
we add on drugs and other procedures so
once the patient is in that zone those
tumor cells become extremely vulnerable
right so low dose because they can't
produce glutathione yeah they're sitting
duck space yes for any other things that
we apply right Hyperbaric oxygens yeah
exactly what are those two cells yeah
but you got to be in that zone to have
that effect right they're not then this
other stuff doesn't work yeah I know in
my clinic that's what we do is ketogenic
diet so restricted ketogenic diet
hyperbaric oxygen yeah it seems to work
great oh boy right we'll do some
nutritional supplementation and things
like that as well but you're right and
then if somebody were to go a
conventional model right adding in that
chemotherapy now we've used very very
low dose yeah low dose because you don't
need as much no you don't need it yeah
and we're showing that too we get
through the blood-brain barrier we can
keto ketogenic rights facilitate drug
delivery through the blood-brain barrier
yeah I mean it's amazing it's incredible
yeah so uh unfortunately it's not being
used yes in in medicine yeah you know
well well thank you for being a Pioneer
and leading the research on that because
ultimately that's how we get things into
into modern day practices lots of
research and continually proving that
well we have the pre-clinical systems
that allow us to validate and vet some
of these things yeah so after we do this
and this this is where the research
money comes in yeah because it costs a
lot of money to do these things
absolutely but you want to be sure that
if you're taking a new therapy you're
not going to harm yourself right right
so you have a pre-clinical system that
tells us that this is a really effective
it's not harming the subjects and we
think just with a few changes it would
be easily adapted to the human and
generally that's what we find yeah we
don't want to be taking stuff that you
haven't vetted in the pre-clinical
system because you could potentially
harm yourself yeah and you know so you
really have to have that knowledge and
that makes everyone feel a lot more
comfortable yeah absolutely and what um
what are your thoughts on exogenous
ketones and using those to help people
get into therapeutic I think they just
get themselves into uh the Zone yeah
then take the exogenous right and see
whether or not they stay in the zone
what does it do to their Zone yeah do it
naturally first right then take the
ketones yeah because some they're not
all the same yeah some of them have
sugar some of them have a lot of
you don't know what those components are
going to do to your physiological state
right so the way to do that you put
yourself into the Zone then take that
brand of exogenous yeah and say does it
lower my zone or does it does it throw
me out of ketones I see yeah so even so
it says ketones will happen how come my
blood sugar is going higher yeah don't
use that it's very simple absolutely as
long as you have the knowledge to note
what your body is is doing where it is
you know that taking this or that will
have an effect yeah just like we learned
from taking uh dark red wine and
expensive champagnes you know the highly
expensive French small bubble champagne
doesn't throw a lot of people out of
ketosis it's good to know yeah right
dark red burgundy wines white wines are
thrown out beer you throw out so yeah
you know what you're capable of doing
right people need to know that so they
can be participant in life right yeah
yeah it makes a lot of sense knowledge
is important for people yeah definitely
now you talked about L-glutamine as a as
a fermenter as well or glutamine I
should say glutamine and the amino acid
in the body yeah glutamine comes in it's
broken down to glutamate yeah it goes
into the TCA cycle it's metabolized to
succinyl succinyl COA the succinate
right well succinate is the it's
actually succinate fermentation okay
that is coming from glutamine ultimately
and that will give tremendous energy to
some of these cancer cells so you have
to shut that you have to shut the door
off and that's what we're learning now
that's why you have to use combinations
of these targeted drugs and you can't do
that alone but you can't do it by diet
you can't just say I'm not going to eat
you know foods with glutamine because we
have so much I've never said anywhere
that a ketogenic diet would cure cancer
right it puts you on the on the path for
resolution yes but by itself it probably
won't right but that makes other things
work remarkable more effectively and
then you could potentially have
resolution yeah absolutely so you guys
are hearing it from you know top
researcher on basically the metabolic
theory of cancer Dr Thomas Seyfried here
and he's telling you hey put your body
into that state of therapeutic ketosis
and it just allow is your body your own
immune system to be able to you know
basically be able to break down cancer
cells and then combining that with
different therapies based on you know
your clinical State you know your your
particular cancer and what you feel most
comfortable with can be an effective
strategy that you can utilize to help
overcome cancer and you know this is why
you know we're doing research like this
to get this out to people
um so we can save more lives right and
so is there anything you want to leave
the the audience with any sort of
thoughts or inspiration well I think
that we we have to realize basically
that cancer is a metabolism metabolic
disease not a genetic disease right and
most of the therapies that we're using
in the clinic yeah toxic radiations all
these things they're designed to kill
cancer cells by stopping their
proliferation right but if you take away
glucose and glutamine you can do the
same thing with anti-toxicity yeah and
very cost effective you know this is
another unfortunately this may be the
the largest weakness of our therapy yeah
it's not you can't make money on it at
least not yet so
um these others are highly much more
profitable right but what is it what is
the biggest interest is in saving people
or is it in making money yeah so people
have to come to this make this decision
for themselves right but we have a we
have a pathway now a pathway forward
where people once they know how to do
this and once their caregivers know how
to do this we're going to manage this
disease much more effectively than we
are absolutely absolutely yeah
absolutely and so again this is the
author of uh cancer as a metabolic
disease okay and I know you're doing a
lot of research right now tell us more
about the foundation and how they can
access Christopherson uh was one of the
first uh to read my book yeah and he was
blown away yeah and he said well how
come we nobody knows about this right
and he didn't believe a lot of the
things that I said but then he became
like a journalist and he went around and
interviewed people throughout the
country and in different uh countries as
well to see whether or not the things
that I was writing were true or
substantiated and they were yeah so then
he decided to write his own book
tripping over the truth which was you
know what's going on in this cancer yeah
so um then he set up a private
Foundation to uh to collect funds that
uh are are used in in large part to
support our research too uh through the
university yeah so the Boston College
sets up Grant grants with these private
foundations and they support my research
through these private foundations and
that's a very uh traditional way of
acting to support academic research yeah
you can people cannot write me checks
personally and I'd go out and buy
supplies right do it that way it's
through an organization through because
I am an employee of Boston College my my
mission is to train and teach
undergraduates and graduate students and
then the support that we get through the
university comes from private
foundations or federal government grants
and this kind of thing but it comes
through the university but Travis's
Foundation does have a an ongoing
research Grant with Boston College and
therefore the funds come through
Travis's foundation and other private
Foundation yeah as well yeah so this is
the way uh that works because we test
all of we do the pre-clinical testing as
soon as I see something that work I call
my Collision clinician friends we're
able to implement these yeah and then we
start bringing it to the to the
population this is what we call a bench
to bedside this is translational
research the way it should be done right
right and we're seeing immediate success
for so many patients based because we've
developed the best animal models for
brain cancer and metastatic cancer yeah
and when and it's very hard people see a
cure cancer and might you don't when you
have cancer in mice that's like human
it's just as difficult as it is to cure
the human yeah so we have the best
models we know what works what doesn't
work and then we can make
recommendations to the Traditions as to
what they should do and the example of
this is what's going on in Turkey right
now where in their clinic in Istanbul
are using our press pulse concept to
treat all these stage four cancer
patients with remarkable success wow so
we can see the direct benefit of what
we're doing yeah and stage four I mean
these are very fast-growing cancers
these are the hardest okay and so you
know with his animal studies they're
showing that hey we're seeing they're
seeing results then they go and this is
this is the man who spends his time in
the lab right and then he goes ahead he
contacts his clinician friends they
start putting in an action so we're able
to see okay it's working on the rats how
about you know with people right mice
I'm sorry not rats mice and then boom
now we we start to implement it with
people are we going to see similar
results we've seen similar results with
the dogs dogs yeah cancer right they're
they're just as responsive as you yeah
yeah so that's why it's all the same
disease right same therapy works on dogs
works on human works on mice yeah right
it's one disease one mechanism of action
it's a fermenting disease taking
fermentable fuels and you manage the
disease it's not that complicated right
exactly we've made it complicated
disease yeah absolutely I just want to
encourage you guys if you are enjoying
this information you want to support Dr
seyfried's research and really really
get this message out and and ultimately
just really apply this for yourself then
I want to encourage you to own the keto
Edge Summit for yourself you'll get all
the interviews the transcripts
everything you need to be able to use
for a lifetime at your own time and your
pace and if you'd be so honored to
consider that
um you know ultimately we would uh we
would consider that a great honor and a
privilege so God bless you guys and we
will see you in a future interview
[Music]